# intro
these are notes for some things that i wanted to highlight about my run.
there is a lot of improvement potential, but my goal was sub 1:30:00 and i had
to convince myself to stop for now. i encourage you to use this routing and
improve my time.
run was performed on version 0.2.2-alpha.

## earth
### 01 - equipment
i use my own [rules](https://kkard2.com/static/colobot/ruleset.html), because i didn't like
[speedrun.com rules](https://www.speedrun.com/colobot?h=Any-colobot-gold-edition&rules=game)
allowing time warp and also did some minor wording changes.

### 02 - building
here we write programs that will be used for the entire run - premade programs
are not allowed. `f` is firing for 1/20th of a second, which is the lowest time
that spawns projectiles, and `m` moves the bot in a straight line. a lot of
time is saved by `m` (or "motoring"), because you can overlap doing something
else with movement.

### 03 - departure
destroying the bot factory is a common way to save time if it won't be used
anymore, it allows for the bot to exit more easily.
motoring saves marginal amount of time, wheeled bots are faster than
tracked ones.
i hit my split key 1s too early, so segment time for this and next level is
wrong.


## moon
### 01 - titanium ore
here you can see that we overwrite read-only switch cell program with ctrl+o;
it's a bug, but it's very convienient because you don't need to add a new
program slot on every bot you need to motor with. whole sequence is
ctrl+e -> ctrl+o -> m -> enter -> ctrl+e and then alt+e to execute.
you get used to it after some time.

i should probably build more north than east.
building bot factory before doing research is faster (i think at least, didn't
measure in a long time).

i don't need to worry about starting motoring on wheeled quickly, because
i still end up waiting for the flying at the end. but i hope you can see the
potential of motoring by now.

### 02 & 03 - flying drill #1 & #2
the only notable thing about this map is that if you allow premade script you
can make a program for the flying bot, and grab the rest of targets with the
astronaut.

in normal gameplay this map is pretty important to get used to flying bots
because the game knows other bots are mostly useless if you have access to
flying and they're the bulk of what you'll use in the future.

### 04 - black box
here you can see why remapping movement keys is probably a good idea. i hit
alt+w or alt+s on accident and it switches to the second program slot, which
results in program error on alt+e (i want to make space for building this way).
the current setup forces me to stop moving before i try to execute a program.

you could be more precise with thie amount of charging, but it doesn't save
that much time and i'd rather not reset because i wanted to save a second.


## tropica
### 01 - the trap
this map just checks if the astronaut is dead. this attempt was pretty bad,
you can roblox yourself even before the jetpack warning.
if you press back movement at the right time you can use knockback from the
bump to distance yourself from the ship faster. pressing it to early will
result with a lot of damage reduction.

### 02 - amnesia
there are probably some improvements that could be done here, maybe even
using smilesick fly which i'll discuss in more detail on volcano. jetpack
management is scuffed near the end, you don't want to go up the spaceship
without flying.

### 03 - on the offensive
in retrospect, i should probably use the flying grabber instead of the wheeled
one. the reasoning behind using a wheeled one is that i can motor easier, but i
don't think it's worth it.

if you line it up properly energy cell sacrifice should not fail.

in one run i got stuck in foliage in the flight preventing sphere, so i'm
careful to not do that again.

note that i can aim and then shoot with alt+e, which makes it very viable to
use `f` instead of `roboaim` like previous runs.

there is a chance of energy running out, but after doing this level a few times
it's pretty consistent, apart from ants moving randomly.

### 04 - shooting practice
regarding movement on this map, i'm trying to fly straight towards the next
target instead of the tnt bot. this could also be improved with astronaut
grabbing some targets, but to a lesser extent (of course talking about premade
programs)

you can take off without the shooter, which saves a few seconds.

### 05 - black box
i placed the first titanium ore way too far from the center, so i struggle
with the second one and ultimately fail, which loses a few seconds.

something to note, i didn't measure the correct way to path with the subber
so maybe it's possible to save 1-2s there.

## crystalium
### 01 - viruses
i should probably open `m` in the second slot; i don't open it at all because i
use collect titanium from the first slot and it's selected by default.

worms are going underground in cycles, so maybe it is a good idea to make the
shooter first instead of the grabber?

### 02 - subterranean strategy
this map is on a timer, if you do it perfectly and you're lucky you don't need
to wait for any worms to resurface.

lost a cycle on the 4th worm in this run, this is the most likely candidate for
losing a cycle.

### 03 - system failure
this is basically a cutscene after i get to the spot where the rouge bot will
land. i tried to somehow break the program and get the black box early, but i
don't think it's possible.

so you can skip 2 minutes ahead in the video after i land.

### 04 - the lost valley
same strategy as the former world record, you can grab the black box and mostly
ignore aliens.


## saari
### 01 - uranium
this is the first "sketchy" level this far into the run.

previously i had a very similar strategy, but i was motoring along the intended
path. i changed it to go right when i went back to routing after losing a
run twice in a row on this level. it is more consistent and faster, so i'm glad
i did that.

on this particular attempt, i am too late switching to grabber twice, first on
the angle adjustment, second when i'm driving into the wall. this is why i end
up with lower energy cell level than usual.

### 02 - invasion
this level is quite random, ants can either cooperate or not.

i only need to build one tower on the other side than the provided bot. i
experimented a bit with not building a tower at all by modifying provided
defender program; removing goto and aiming down a bit. this allows for it to
kill ants by staying up on the spaceship, but you need to move it around after
it kills a "wave", so it didn't really save time.

building radar is kinda necessary because of ant moving very randomly.

some runs died on this level because of the shooter running out of energy.
also, waves are delayed by using alien eggs, i'm mentioning it here because
it'll be relevant on terranova 3.

### 03 - disarmed
i overlap killing ants with grabbing the black box. you can even do it without
using a motor script but it's harder.

## volcano
### 01 - transport
charging energy cell here is not necessary, but doesn't lose time.

you can mostly ignore this one spider, i never died to it but i quicksave
beforehand just to be safe.

from my testing you don't have enough time to make an additional wheeled
grabber; it wouldn't save a lot of time anyway.

### 02 - analysis
i skip building a tower, and instead grab the most north titanium cubes.
wasps focus the closest item, and after grabbing 2 titanium, they focus on
energy cells.

i do things in the wrong order, i'm supposed to power the grabber first, then
build the lab while motoring towards the organic matter.

### 03 - mountain warfare
this level is somewhat scary, the risk of losing a bot here is very real.
i delay the grabber for consistency but it's not failproof.

### 04 - technological treasure
this is the level where i use the
[smilesick skip](https://youtu.be/RiuduNKK6N8?t=112). when flying, if i time
starting to ascend correctly after the engine overheats i'm still going up
due to momentum. it's not possible to cross this gap without this technique.

i'm using the jetpack overheat indicator crossing map zoom slider position as
a clue to start going up.

### 05 - safe home
for the first gap here you also need the smilesick fly.

i mess up and i have to load a quicksave using f9 2 times. before the second
time i hit f8 on accident, which enables 2x time speed. it doesn't give me any
advantage because i load after that, but i get pretty annoyed at that, and
start making stupid mistakes.

it technically makes this run not verifyable under my ruleset, but i kept going
regardless.

### 06 - time for a sharp exit
nothing

## centaury
### 01 - cloning
you can't grab titanium before the recycler animation finishes.

i delay starting collect titanium on the legged grabber, because if i do it too
early it crashes because converter is not built yet. i also should've moved the
astronaut near the building site of the converter while motoring.

i forgot a bit how this level is supposed to be played. i switch to the
astronaut too early both times.

legged grabber can potentially put titanium in a space that is not big enough
to build a bot factory.

maybe i should've considered grabbing 2 titanium ores with the flying grabber,
because i wait some time for the last cube. other thing i could try is putting
the converter in a better spot.

### 02 - target practice
going to the side instead of forward allows for more linear pathing. you don't
need to go thru the ship.

### 03 - cleansing
you don't want to wait for the new nuclear cell message, because you can grab
it earlier than that.

shown startegy speaks for itself, but there are some theoretical to go over.
you could potentialy blow up spiders with the grabber by just flying thru them.
it would require some tight switching between bots i think.
there is also potential for not making a nuclear power cell and make 2 shooters
instead, but i think it's even less realistic.

i handle this final batch of ants very poorly.

### 04 - new policies
i build a bot factory before starting research, which loses time.

### 05 - self-defense
there is no time to save here, aside from maybe motoring to the ship and going
back with astrounaut at the same time.

## orpheon
this planet has flashing lights, so epilepsy warning.

### 01 - logistics
this is the first level where i'd apply the definition of save-load abuse
(sla). saving and loading resets the lightning timer, so it gives you an
advantage. in retrospect i should've used it and save-loaded before leaving the
spaceship.

on the other side doing this map without sla allowed is rng hell.

also i don't remember which ant to go to, i really should.

after the load the `f` program i opened previously was gone, because
overwriting read-only programs is not saved. there were also very noticable
sound issues, it's due to some bug in the engine and it happens sometimes.

### 02 - storm shelter
same as before, spamming save button.

## terranova
epilepsy warning over.

### 01 - killer mushrooms
order of operation here is very intentional, but maybe it can still be
improved.

tower is needed for like 1 ant, but maybe it's possible to tank damage with the
astronaut? didn't test it.

skipping mushrooms this way is easier for motoring, and also probably faster.

### 02 - poison hail
subber is faster, so i start moving with the shielder first.

you can also see what happens if you mess up overwriting a script.

### 03 - gold digger
this is the only use of sla in the run that saves time.
so, ants in this level are delayed via a cbot script, which waits for some
amount of time at the start. if you perform a save-load this timer resets.

this is different from saari 2, which uses eggs for this purpose, and
eliminates the potential for sla giving an advantage.

moving down with subber and shielder makes the only ant that comes to the ship
not block spaceship doors at the end of the level.

the second save-load happens before i start building derrick, because
save-loading during that breaks things. also, save-load resets shielder range
so i need to fix that because otherwise power might run out.

i return with the grabber very unoptimally, but it is what it is.

### 04 - alien queen
my grabber handling on this level is pretty suboptimal, i often leave it
motoring for too long.

when grabbing the yellow key i'm really hoping that no ants come to the base
and destroy the orga shooter (it's rng). i get a warning in the form of its
icon flashing red, but i can't really do much when grabber is in danger as
well.

i'm shooting the phaser by accident, but there is enough energy in this nuclear
cell for it to be a non-issue.

during motoring the phazer shooter i kill ants that were guarding the yellow
key because it's a win condition. now i don't really care if ants come (i would
prefer if they didn't) because the astronaut will tank the damage and shield
the shielder from getting destroyed (only used bot left besides phazer
shooter).

in this run they come, so i swap nuclear cells in a different place than usual.
you need to do that because shielder will not last the whole route with its
original energy level. if you still have the grabber with enough energy left,
you can swap cells with the bot because it's faster. it's inconsistent for me
to get to that point tho.

i don't focus on ants behind me, because they just follow me and i can kill
them at the end. maybe it's possible to get the orga shooter here as well? i
didn't try that when routing, but it would be very helpful to finish off all
the ants.

so, that's basically the run. i hope you enjoyed it! if you have any questions,
leave them in the comments below and i'll try to answer them to the best of my
ability. see you around.
